Okay, well, my name is Mary Elaine Miller. My
maiden name is Kraus. K-R-A-U-S. No, no, E. Oh,
okay. From, where did Kraus come from? Well, my dad
was from Detroit. Okay. And his ancestry all...
originated in Detroit or Germany? I mean, you went
back a couple of generations at Detroit, and then
prior to that they were in Germany. I was fishing to
see if you were Texas or something. I'm not a Texas
debt lawyer. No, I'm a Texan by choice. Actually, I
wasn't even by choice. I was dragged in kicking and
screaming, but once I got here, I loved it. I was in a
sense. My father told the three sons, three kids
rather, three sons and daughter, we could go to
school anywhere we wanted to as long as it wasn't
Louisiana where we live. That's where I grew up.
Because my mom, her maiden name is Troianni, and
she's from New Orleans. And when I was very young,
well, I actually was born in Key West, Florida. My
dad was in the Navy. My mom and dad met in New
Orleans, and they got married, and then she went to
Key West with him. This was all during the war. And
then when I was young, we moved to New Orleans. And I
actually grew up in New Orleans. Oh, did you? OK.
And lived there until I was 21, at which time I
moved. Oh, yeah. I tell people that I've lived in
several different places, but New Orleans is the
most interesting of them. So I claim that as home. I
was born there, but we grew up in Natchitoches.
Oh, yeah. You grew up in New Orleans, basically.
Right, and I went to school there also. I went to
Loyola. Oh, did you? Okay. And I got a bachelor's
degree in psychology.
I'm trying to think. A junior history professor
probably knows at Loyola. I used to know. Father,
O'Neal. Oh, yes, I did know Father O'Neal. Did you
know Father O'Neal? You bet. I surely did. He was a
character. He could tell stories. He was
wonderful. I'll tell you, the biggest character
there, and this guy was really weird, this kind of
pilier. He taught theology.
But I remember O'Neill. I remember O'Neill
sitting and regaling us with New Orleans, I guess
it was a dialect. He couldn't. imitate the
language from each different block. Oh, really?
Oh, I love that. The pure Brooklyn. Yeah, my
brother sounds like a Brooklyn cab driver. Yeah, I
had aunts who lived in New Orleans, and they liked
me in the Prince Porter area. And they were so
amazing. Oh, yes. I thought that was interesting.
So, Loyola, psychology? Yeah, and then after
that, I went up to Princeton. I actually had a very
short-lived marriage that took me to Princeton.
My husband was a graduate student there, and I
worked in the psychology department and just took
some courses there.
My marriage didn't survive, but I met my present
husband at Princeton, and then we ended up at
Michigan State. Okay. My father went to Michigan
State. We've got all kinds of connections,
haven't we? Isn't it funny how people just travel
in the same circle? Well, then at Michigan State, I
did not work at the university. I worked for the
state of Michigan. And I went into social work. And
I actually took a lot of courses at the university
because I had, at that time, attended to try to go to
law school. Well, actually, I was going to go to law
school. And then I was going to go to medical
school. So I took courses for years in all the
basics that I needed. And then I ended up doing
neither one. But I worked in social work and then
went into supervision. And then I was a case worker
for the state. And that was before it was split into
income maintenance and child welfare. It was
together at the time. So you worked with the entire
families and did both the income maintenance part
and the social work aspect. And then I became a
supervisor. And then my career just kind of
evolved in an entirely different direction away
from social work. I had almost a... life-changing
experience in social work where a young woman that
I had worked with and really loved as a matter of
fact and we just developed such an affection
before I had a baby she went into a mental
institution we had to take the baby away place the
baby elsewhere and I had to go testify in court
again about her incompetence as a parent and she
ended up killing herself and that was and and she
was like a younger sister to me i mean that's how
much i had become attached to her and i realized at
that moment that you don't change people they
change themselves and i wasn't i wasn't the person
to do it so anyway i went into supervision and then i
got into management into training and then into
management development, and had a wonderful
director by the name of Jack Dempsey. He was known
all over the state. He was the governor's
right-hand man, and he was known in Washington. He
was highly respected everywhere in political and
welfare system. circles and he died prematurely
from lung cancer. He was a chain smoker but he gave
me wonderful opportunities for development and I
ended up traveling all over the country really on
different projects and was able to get a half
million dollar grant to run what we were calling an
organizational development project. and it was a
demonstration project for the federal
government demonstrating how if you change the, I
mean it was really state of the art with regard to
management techniques. If you change the way you
manage the people in an organization, you're
going to change the way the organization
produces. And so we did some really in-depth,
creative management development with all
managers and supervisors in different
organizations around the state. and wrote up a
two-year study. You were mainly in state agencies
or federal agencies? No, we were working in the
state of Michigan welfare agencies in a lot of the
different counties. And we had picked like six
demonstration sites. But in doing so, then, we
worked with a couple of other states because they
were also involved in the project.
At the end of the two years, we wrote up a report that
was just dramatic changes, and it was published by
Share, I can't remember, it's been so long, it's
been 20 or 25 years. Anyway, and then I had the
opportunity to make presentations all over the
country with regard to this project. As a result, I
went from the social work part of it into
management and management development. Then I
got into strategic planning and became the
director of planning for this large state agency
that had 14,000 employees all across the state.
Well, after that, then, I started having
children, and we moved to Atlanta. And so I had
decided that while the children were young, I had
three of them while they were young. What was your
husband doing there? My husband had a PhD in
chemistry, and he was the vice chair of the
chemistry department at Michigan State. Then he
was at Ohio State for a very short time and
commuted, actually, on weekends because we never
made the move. And then he went into an
instrumentation company, a scientific
instrumentation company, Nicolet Instrument,
in Atlanta, Georgia, and we moved to Atlanta. And
at that time was when I had the very young children.
So what I did instead of getting a full-time job, I
went to work for Actually, I went to work with one
other person in a management consulting firm, and
we did some management consulting for the welfare
agency in Atlanta and for a couple of other
organizations, a bank and what was that? I can't
remember. But that worked pretty good. That
worked out just fine because I was able to work at
home a lot and speak with the children and yet stay
in touch with them. How long ago was that when you
were doing that roughly? That ended about 14 years
ago. Because we moved here. That kind of an
activity, and now everybody's becoming
management consultants. Oh, yeah. Everything I
did, I did at the front end of it, and then dropped it
and went into something else. Yeah, that was
before management consulting was quite so
popular. Then we moved here, and I did... And your
husband came to the... He came to the College of
Science here. Okay. And he was actually the Saba in
the College of Science, and then he took over as the
Director of Electronic Microscopy, and he's now
in Research Administration.
And he does just a tiny little bit of teaching and no
research anymore. But we moved here, and then I...
When did you come to college? We moved here in 1984,
and in 86, I came to work for the university. So I've
been here about 11 years. And what was your first
employment? I was the Director of Operations
Analysis, which was the group that did
operational reviews on campus. Under whom? Under
Robert Smith. Robert hired me and I worked at him
until he retired. And then after a couple of years
of that job, I became Assistant Vice President for
Finance and Administration.
And I am now Associate Vice President for
Administration. Let me get those titles correct.
Assistant Vice President for Finance and
Administration. And then, and now... I'm
associate vice president for administration
because we split finance and administration into
two divisions. When Robert became the vice
president, we put the two divisions together. Who
is the vice president for finance? Bill Crump.
Where's Danny Parker in the home? Danny Parker is
with the provost. He's the head of the fiscal part
of Ron Douglas.
Thank you. 20 years ago. OK, now, and let's see.
When does the press come into your focus? OK. As I
said, I was the head of operations analysis. When I
came over to be assistant vice president for
finance and administration, I still had
responsibility for operations analysis. I had
responsibility for human resources. I had
responsibility for parking and a couple of other
departments. But the key ones were operations
analysis, which did exactly what it said. I mean,
they looked at organizations and analyzed where
they were going wrong. and for human resources,
which meant that we worked with the people side of
it. And that's really what my talent is and my
interest is in organizational analysis and
particularly how you make people work
effectively together in organizations, team
building, things like that. Well, Rick Stetter
reported to Bill Mobley, the president at the
time, And Rick was having some real serious
problems with managing his organization. And so
Bill sent him to me, to talk to me, and I spent
several hours, several sessions that were like
two hours long each, working with Rick on what he
could do. Good. I was glad to hear that. That
clarifies a lot. Okay. Thank you. Working with
Rick on what he could do to get it back at the price.
And he was very open, as you said, about all the
things that he did wrong. Yes, yes. He would come to
me and hang his head and say, this is what I've done.
And I would work with him and say, Rick, These are
the kinds of things that you need to do if you want to
be able to work effectively with the people in your
organization. And he would make notes, and I gave
him a book to read on the seven habits of highly
effective people and things like that. And we
talked about how he could set some goals with his
people because their acquisitions were
declining, their publications were declining,
people were not working together effectively.
And one thing I said to him was, Rick, stop
discussing your personal business with your
employees. Just stop. Yeah, and Noah said he told
him that over and over again. Rick wrote it all
down. He said, yes, yes, I know exactly what to do.
He would walk out of my office pumped up,
enthusiastic, and never did a thing. Would come
back a month later. And I finally said, Rick,
you're not doing anything that you know you have to
do. You're not going to succeed. So he finally
left. And this was at, I remember, this was at a
Mother's Club coffee on a Saturday morning in the
fall, just as Rick, Rick was on extended sick leave
at the time. Actually, he was just, they were, they
just tried to get him to go home. And Bill Mobley and
Robert Smith and I and Dean Gage, who was the
provost, were standing around talking about the
press and what we were going to do with the press.
And Rick apparently had talked to Bill Mobley and
suggested that I be involved in any decision about
the future of the press, because Rick, I think,
really respected my opinion. He just couldn't do
anything with the information. And so Bill Mobley
said to me, well, what do you know about And I said,
well, I read books. And that's a common
denominator, incidentally. Oh, is that right?
Yes, it is. Everybody who's in there, you know,
it's an accidental profession, they call it. No
one plans to go into publishing. And what is the
ties between them? They all like books. They
really do, no matter who, from clerks on up or down.
Oh, well, that's interesting. I said, well, I read
books. And he said, well, that's good enough.
That's right, yeah. He said, I'd like you to go in.
And just see what you can do to pull that group back
into a team until we can find the right director.
And so that's how I ended up there. Not because I had
any strength in publishing at all, but because I
had strength in helping people. So that's how I got
there. Excellent. Thank you. That helped so much.
That's a good story. And I used most of all of that.
You can read and edit it as you like. I think I
handled these things better. So you go to the
press. What month was that? Do you remember? I
believe that was in October. Oh no, that was before
95. That was October of 94, I guess. End of
September, beginning of October, something like
that. And I remember at the time that that's when I
was also chairing the Shots Across Brazos Valley.
I don't know if you remember that, where we did the
flu shots and the immunizations. Well, that was
eating my lunch for the first two or three months
that I was there. And so I was very stressed out. And
everyone there had, I mean, I think they were
wondering, what is this animal that came here, you
know, that's still doing assistant vice
president work, is consumed with this community
project that you know i was doing before the
university and is here trying to help us but we we
worked through it and they were wonderful people
and very accepting yeah they are Now, what I had
known, you asked me what were my impressions
before and after I got there. What I had known about
before I got in was only through Rick. I'd never met
anybody there before I walked in the door the
first, well actually Dean took me over a week
before and introduced me. But prior to that I'd
never known any of them. And so Rick had told me
about different people that gave me an insight
into their strengths and some of their strengths
and weaknesses. So I had formed some opinions
before I ever got there, some of which were right
and some of which were not right. But I had a pretty
good sense of the kind of disharmony that existed
in the organization and the backbiting. And that
was just reinforced when I got there. I mean, I
think my impressions were fairly accurate but I
didn't have any idea of the depth of the pain that
existed in that organization. They had allowed
themselves to to be practically destroyed. Yeah.
And the one question that I kept asking them after I
really saw how painful it was for them, the one
question that I asked so many of them was, how could
you have ever given one person that kind of power
over your life that you would allow him to have that
negative impact on you? Yeah. And what answer did
you get? It was almost like They had not thought of
it that way, but they had released that power
themselves. I said, you didn't have to let Rick
come in and destroy your relationships. You let
that happen. And I was going to say, one of the
answers might indeed be that this is the way they
were brought up, which was the Wardlaw syndrome.
Well, it could be. They were under the control.
Because they talked about it. They didn't think
for themselves. They talked to Wardlaw as the
father figure. And there's not, you know, Lloyd
didn't have quite that connotation, but he still
continuously That's right. The Wardlaw era. And I
think he did it consciously, deliberately. Well,
probably. I'm sure he was trying. Possibly. He was
probably trying to be another Frank Wardlaw,
because... I don't think so. I think he was using
the Franks. Oh, really? I really do. friendship
with lloyd but the more i looked at this you know he
gave so many benefits continued to toot frank
wardlaw and this is not necessarily natural you
know well let's face it i mean unless you have an
enormous ego it would be really hard to follow in
those footsteps exactly yeah So I think he used the
Barlow image deliberately to continue to
cultivate this aura, and it worked. I mean, you
know, you keep Joe Moore, and you kept John
Lindsay, and you kept all the rest of the boys in the
corral, literally. And it was amazing. And I
think, I may be totally wrong, but this is kind of
the way I see it. I think the culture and the whole
place is a family culture, and they have a father
image of their directors, And they preferred to do
that. And Rick certainly could not provide that,
nor did he need to. I mean, what he needed to do was
what I ended up having to do by necessity, because I
knew nothing about the business. And that was let
them do their jobs. And that was my focus. And
Rotell and I kind of touched on this a little bit.
And I talked to him about it. And we talked about the
family culture. And he said, yeah, and I'm
uncomfortable with that. Yeah, they acknowledge
now to me that he is not, that he is uncomfortable
with that. And maybe they just need to recognize
that those days are over. That's it. That's it. And
in fact, the way I think of it is they have to grow up
and stand on their own two feet. It was such a
close-knit society in a peculiar way. They're
open, you know, there are a lot of people eating
out, but by the same token, they're very
tight-knit. Well, I'm hoping that if I brought
anything to that organization, it was two things.
One is that I restored or maybe built a team,
because I'm not sure how much the team actually
existed or whether the decisions were just doled
out by the head, but that I helped to build them into
a team. And the other is that I helped them to stand
on their own two feet, because as I said, I couldn't
make the decisions for them. All I could do was to
push them to make their own decisions. So kind of to
help them to grow up and to become a mature press
rather than the fledgling press that I saw when I
first got there. That they were still, you know,
kind of a baby press. That helps. That fits pretty
well where I'm moving, I think, between the two of
you. Well, this is what I found when I first got
there. I wrote down some negative things that I
found and some positive things. I found that they
were basically immobilized. And they had been
that way, I think, for a couple of years. They had
declining acquisitions, declining production,
because they couldn't work. They were so consumed
with talking about their problems and focusing on
their problems and thinking about their problems
that they weren't working on their business. They
wasted a tremendous amount of time. There was a lot
of paranoia in the organization, a lot of
back-fighting. There were closed doors with two
people sitting in there talking about something
else that was going on in the organization. A lot of
frustration, and I mean professional
frustration because they didn't feel like they
were doing anything with their careers. There was
some sorrow because many of them who had been there
a while knew the glory of the press, and it wasn't
there at all anymore. They felt that sense of loss.
In fact, when I walked in there, oh, I heard about
for ages was Frank Ward Law and what it used to be
like. And if I didn't have such a strong ego of mine,
I mean, if I didn't have so much... of my own
personal sense of satisfaction, I think I'd have
been crushed. Crushed by the ward law, yeah. But I
didn't feel sensitive about it at all. They were
working against one another, and there was
completely inadequate communication. I mean,
they didn't talk enough about anything with
regard to the business. On the positive side...
What I found were people who were tremendously
talented and tremendously dedicated to that
organization. They loved the business that
they're in. They absolutely loved it. But even
more than that, they loved the press. The Texas A&M
University Press. They loved that organization.
And they hated what was happening to it. They had
wonderful relationships with their operatives.
And they had a real eagerness to get back on track.
They just didn't have a clue how to do it. So with
that,
we set about... How did you find all this out? Just
talking to them and watching them.
Because that's one thing I did pick up. You were
always there. You were always to be seen. And that
really helped, they said. Because it kind of gave,
it was an open door in itself. And I think that's one
of the expressions somebody used. When you came
in, the door was open. All the doors opened. In
fact, I told them not to close the doors. Good! I
said, I didn't want, you know, Diana Hine used to,
her door was always closed and locked when she was
not there. And I said, no more. The door stays open.
I said, if you've got something that other people
can't see, first I would be puzzled as to what that
was, but if it's something confidential, you put
it in a file cabinet, you lock it, and you give
someone else the key so that if we need to get out, we
can't. Your computer doesn't get locked up so that
nobody can, you know, retrieve your information.
Bonnie and Jim really did pretty well. I mean, he
laughed, I think, because of the stresses and the
strange things he did. I think he was a smoker and
they didn't like smoking. Oh, yeah. They resented
him, too. They resented the arrangement that Rick
made with him. Yeah, did they? They really
resented him. In fact, they resented a lot of one
another. Wonderful people. And they have been
such a tight, productive group. And one of the
things you said that I think it was a useful sense of
work ethic, and that is that everything we do,
everyone has touched. Each book has been touched
by everybody in the state. That was a nice
expression. We all do this together. And I think,
and they may have lost that, but I think it's It's
coming back, but it's still there. But I thought
that expressed, indeed, the sense of cohesion and
basic work ethic in the group. Well, I think that's
what I tried to do when I got there. See, the way that
I believe in communication, I believe that that's
the answer to most of the problems. Just talk about
them. And so that's what I tried to do. And if ever I
heard a rumbling, I would try to bring in the two
people who were having the problem and get them to
talk it out. And sometimes it didn't work, but most
of the time it did. I tried to open up the business to
everybody. We would have, and in fact, I think it
drove them crazy. And when Tom came in, he
immediately stopped what I had started. But I
think what I did was real important at the time. We
would have weekly or biweekly, I mean semiweekly.
Sometimes I think it was twice a week. I can't
remember. But very frequent staff meetings with
large groups of people. And we would talk about
everything. And some of them were very resentful
at the beginning. They'd say, why are you having
these people talk about my business? I do the
acquisitions. I do the editing. I do the working
with the printers and all that. Why is everybody
getting involved in my business? And they were
getting very defensive. And we worked on that and
worked on it and worked on it. And I said, as long as
I'm here, your business is their business.
Everybody's business is together. And I tried
real hard to emphasize this notion of internal
customers. that their primary customers were one
another. I took the entire staff on a retreat. I
think it was a two-day retreat. We didn't stay
over. We drove back and forth. We went down to Camp
Allen. And the entire staff, including Mike in the
warehouse, the only people who stayed behind were
student workers. And we talked about the purpose
of the press, the goals that we had for the press,
communication styles. We played games. We did
team building kinds of things. And this was my
emphasis the entire 18 months that I was there, was
to try to get them working together as a team. And
they're doing the publishing job. Your job is to
get them to do the publishing job. That's right.
And they would come to me with questions about
publishing. And I would say, that's your
expertise. Although I learned an awful lot, and I
did end up making a lot of decisions. And I'll tell
you, the reason that I made a lot of decisions is
because they were very conservative about what
they were willing... They confessed that
conservative... And I used to push them to stretch
their limits, you know. Oh, you're ordering
20,000 copies? I think you can sell 25. Order 25. I
made some mistakes, but that's OK. They just
stretched and stretched. They probably got that
extra 5,000 sitting in the warehouse now. They
didn't want to do certain types of books. I said,
why not? That's ridiculous. And Noel would say
things like, we don't do poetry. And I said, I can't
believe that if you ended up with a Robert Frost
manuscript that you wouldn't publish it. Well.
Incidentally, I'm still kind of thinking this one
over. Frank Wardlaw turned down a DeBakey
manuscript in 1977.
Well, they... Because we don't do medicine.
Right. That's right. Well, I said, you know, we'll
do whatever is, you know, whatever we can do a good
job of doing. We won't take on things that that
obviously we're going to fail with, but on the
other hand, we're going to really stretch. Did you
begin to sense at some point a turnaround? Yeah, I
did. First of all, we're in the Borderlands. We're
doing the Borderlands series. And that was one of
the things that I had really pushed. Because I
thought, it's an excellent opportunity. We've
got people on our, whatever the board is called,
the fundraising board, who are from Laredo.
They're interested in us as a press. They're
interested in helping us.